Skin cancers affects millions of people worldwide and is the most common form of cancer globally. There are several types of skin cancers; basal-cell carcinoma, squamous-cell carcinoma, and malignant melanoma which have different visual characteristics. Survival rate depends on many factors, but namely, relies on when the skin cancer was detected, and the average survival rate for skin cancer has increased dramatically over the years. However, the problem is that patients do not come into the clinic until the skin cancer has developed into a visually striking feature on the skin. At this point, the cancer is in the late stages, and is the most detrimental to the patient’s health, requiring harsh punitive treatments which can be damaging to the patient’s overall health. 

To combat this problem, I've developed a mobile application that aims to close the gap between the patient’s everyday routine and going to the doctor's office. 

The MoleChecker application provides a manageable home-based platform for inspecting skin patches and getting a diagnostic from home. The user is presented with two choices for taking a picture. If the user choses to provide training pictures, then a diagnostic field will have to be filled out along with a picture of the associated skin patch. These two fields are then sent to a server, which trains a deep neural network (DNN) based on the user-generated data. If the user choses the testing data tab, then only a picture is taken of the skin lesion in question. The picture is compared with the DNN model trained with all the training images and their associated labels. A probability of the skin patch being normal, suspicious or malignant is then provided. 

The image for training and testing data is provided by the phone itself. All modern cellphones contain a camera and a flash, which we use in tandem to gather image data. We ensure that the flash setting is set to on and take calibration pictures of a dark and light situation to normalize the testing and training images. We then take a picture of the skin patch. The LED from the flash is a broad-spectrum probing device, and the various wavelengths that cross all the wavelengths of the visible spectrum interact with the skin, either being absorbed or scattered. Depending on whether the skin patch is cancerous or not will return a different profile for the light coming back up to the camera, since skin cancer tends to be heavy on melanin, which is a known absorber in the red wavelengths. The picture has a different characteristic profile based on the skin type and this differentiation becomes evident when white light is used as a probe.

Feel free to clone and make changes, I just thought that phones are such powerful tools which we all have in our pockets, and they can do so much more than replying to a Tweet on Twitter. 

 
